A boy from a farm in Illinois.
Edward Ayer.
Edward Ayer, A-Y-E-R.
Edward or Edwin?
Edward.
Edward E. Ayer.
And he was a big collector, major collector?
Big Chicago collector of not just books, but all kinds of things.
In fact, I was astounded to see, when I was at Ithaca a couple months ago, I see on the shelf in their History of Science collection, big fat cattle, the Edward E. Ayer collection.
I pull it off the shelf and it's ornithology.
books at the Field Museum.
Published catalog.
I mean, he collected Egyptian antiquities.
If you go down to the Field Museum, lots of things in there.
Egyptology collection, gift of every year.
Well, he's also the man who convinced Marshall Field to give the original endowment for creating the Field Museum.
The Field Museum's collection has its basis in the World's Fair of 93, and that material was collected for the anthropological exhibits, the ethnographic exhibits, or some of it was.
And then a group of businessmen, led by Ayer, decided it shouldn't leave the city, but it should be the core of a new collection.
But they couldn't find a grandfather, so they went to Marshall Field, and Field agreed to do it.
But Ayer had to agree to be the first president of the board.
You said there's something written about Ayer?
Yeah, it was done by a relative, actually.
Is it a published biography, or is it a...
Some family type thing.
Is it something I'm likely to find at the Widener Library?
Frank Lockridge is the author.
He was a substantial enough guy then to have a biography.
Oh yeah, he was an interesting guy.
In a way he was very much in the
Very much like Huntington, I think, in a lot of ways.
I don't know what Huntington's boyhood was like.
He may have been born with a silver spoon, but Ayer was not.
But they both made a lot of money in railroads.
Ayer was selling railroad ties.
Huntington was making railroads.
Huntington was making railroads, right.
But I think in later years they were very thick.
Ayer and Ayer would go out to California and would visit them and stay with them.
Well, I'm going back to Huntington and I've got access.
They're giving me access to the correspondence.
Maybe there's a nice Huntington-Ayer correspondence.
It would be nice to know if there was one because there you'd have two collectors talking to each other.
That's a different discourse than when you have a librarian interested in it.
Huntington-Ayer correspondence at Huntington.
Write that down in that.
But the story of Ayer getting to briefly, he was, as a young man, he was in San Francisco when the Civil War broke up.
So he joined some California regiment and was sent down to southern Arizona to guard a silver mine way down near the Mexican border.
And he's sitting there, and this kid is off the farm.
He hasn't read a book, you know, ever, maybe.
And there's nothing to do.
And he sees in the mine manager's office there's Prescott's Conquest of Mexico.
So he starts reading and he's spellbound, you know, this is incredible.
And it's like, this is what I want to do with my life.
I want to learn about American history.
So that's the air, that's the keystone of the air collection.
That's the myth about it anyway.
Well, yeah, and he wrote the myth.
I mean, it's all history.
This is the home of...
advertising and public relations.
He came back from the Civil War in 1866 or 17.
He's bringing a load of hay or wood or something downtown, and he goes into the bookstore here in Chicago and says, do you have Prescott's Conquest of Mexico?
And they say, yes, we do.
We have the new Scribner's editions in three volumes, and they bring it out.
He said, how much is it?
And they said, $15.
I said, $15.
Well, he said, could I
could I maybe, would you save it for me and I'll pay you when I can or something.
He's like, you take it along and bring us, you know, $3 a month or something.
I don't know, it's over the, you know.
So he buys it and it's down here.
Maybe I can find it.
And he's got a note in it and he says he had taken it in the 90s.
He took it to London to be bound by Zansdorf or something.
And his instructions were, Mr. Zansdorf, this is, I consider this one of the most valuable books in my collection.
I want you to treat it as a version.
I gotta run this, what am I, about a five minute walk to Sam's?
It's more like 10, but you better go.
Okay.
And what's a good question for Sam?
Well, ask him to see his Marderstein books.
How do you spell?
M-A-R-D-E-R-S-T-E-I-G.
Okay.
And the other thing that he collects extensively is bindings, both modern and older bindings.
I better write him because I... Same time as the three volumes of Mexico was bought, which now are the...
Romance of my great American library in the Newbury Library.
Here.
Smell it, huh?
Ah, that smells good.
It's the other one that has been off, but...